I want to share with you something my
father taught me no condition is
permanent so lesson he shared with me
again and again and I learned it to be
true the hard way Here I am in my fourth
grade class this is my yearbook picture
taken in my class in school in Monrovia
Liberia my parents migrated from India
to West Africa in the 1970s and I had
the privilege of growing up there I was
9 years old I love kicking around a
soccer ball and I was a total math and
science geek I was living the kind of
life that really any child would dream
of but no condition is permanent on
Christmas Eve in 1989 civil war erupted
in Liberia the war started in the rural
countryside and within months rebel
armies and marched towards our home town
my school shut down and when the rebel
armies captured the only international
airport people started panicking and
flee my mom came knocking one morning
and said Raj pack your things we have to
go we were rushed to the center of town
and there on a tarmac we were split into
two lines I stood with my family in one
line and we were stuffed into the cargo
hatch of a rescue plane and there on a
bench I was sitting with my heart racing
as I looked out the open hatch I saw
hundreds of Liberians in another line
children strapped to their backs when
they tried to jump in with us I watch
soldiers restrain them they were not
allowed to flee we were the lucky ones
we lost what we had but we were
resettled in America and as immigrants
we benefited from the community of
supporters that rallied around us
they took my family into their home they
mentored me and they helped my dad start
a clothing shop I'd visit my father on
weekends as a teenager to help him sell
sneakers and jeans and every times
business would get bad he reminds me of
that mantra no condition is permanent
that mantra and my parents persistence
and that community of supporters made it
possible for me to go through college
and eventually to medical school I had
once had my hopes crushed in a war but
because of them I had a chance to pursue
my dream to become a doctor my condition
had changed it had been 15 years since I
escaped that airfield but the memory of
those two lines had not escaped my mind
I was a medical student in my mid-20s
and I wanted to go back to see if I
could serve the people we'd left behind
when I got back what I found was utter
destruction the war had left us with
just 51 doctors to serve a country of 4
million people would be like the city of
San Francisco having just 10 doctors so
if you got sick in the city where those
few doctors remain you might stand a
chance but if you got sick in the remote
rural rainforest communities where you
could be days from the nearest clinic I
was seeing my patients die from
conditions that no one should die from
all because they were getting to me too
late imagine you have a two-year-old who
wakes up one morning with a fever and
you realize that she could have malaria
and you know that the only way to get
her the medicine she needs would be to
take her to the river bed get in a canoe
paddle to the other side and then walk
for up to two days through the forest
just to reach the nearest clinic one
billion people live in the world's most
remote communities and despite the
advances we've made in modern medicine
and technology our innovations are not
reaching the last mile these communities
have been left behind because they've
been thought too hard to reach and too
difficult to serve illness is universal
access to care is not and realizing this
lit a fire in my soul no one should die
because they live too far from a doctor
or clinic no condition should be
permanent
and help in this case didn't come from
the outside it actually came from within
it came from the communities themselves
meet musu way out in rural liberia where
most girls have not had a chance to
finish primary school Musa had been
persistent at the age of 18 she
completed high school and she came back
to her community she saw that none of
the children were getting treatment for
the diseases that they needed treatment
for life deadly diseases like malaria
and pneumonia so she signed up to be a
volunteer now there are millions of
volunteers like musu in rural parts
around our world and we got to thinking
community members like musu could
actually help us solve a puzzle our
health care system is structured in such
a way that the work of diagnosing
disease and prescribing medicines is
limited to a team of nurses and doctors
like me but nurses and doctors are
concentrated in cities so rural
communities like Lucis have been left
behind so we started asking some
questions what if we could reorganize
the medical care system what if we could
have community members like musu be a
part or even be the center of our
medical team if musu can help us bring
health care from clinics and cities to
the doorsteps of her neighbors the Musa
was 48 when I met her and despite her
amazing talent and grit she hadn't had a
paying job in 30 years so so what if
technology could support her what if we
could invest in her with real training
real equipment with real medicines and
however have a real job well in 2007 I
was trying to answer these questions and
my wife and I were getting married that
year we asked our relatives to forego
the wedding registry gifts and instead
donate some money so we could have some
startup money to launch a non-profit I
promise you I'm a lot more romantic than
that
we ended up raising $6,000 teamed up
with some Liberians and Americans and
launched a nonprofit called last mile
health and our goal is to bring a health
worker within reach of everyone
everywhere
we designed a three-step process trained
equipped and paid to invest more deeply
in volunteers like musu to become
paraprofessionals to become community
health workers first we trained musu to
prevent diagnose and treat the top ten
diseases afflicting families in her
village a nurse supervisor visited her
every month to coach her we equipped her
with modern medical technology like this
one dollar malaria rapid test and put it
in a backpack full of medicines like
this to treat infections like pneumonia
and crucially a smartphone to help her
track and report on epidemics last we
recognize the dignity and mousses work
with the Liberian government we created
a contract paid her and gave her the
chance to have a real job and she's
amazing mu su has learned over 30
medical skills from screening children
from malnutrition to assessing the cause
of a child koffe with a smartphone to
supporting people with HIV and providing
follow-up care to patients who've lost
their limbs working as part of our team
working as paraprofessionals community
health workers can help ensure that a
lot of what your family doctor would do
reaches the places that most family
doctors could never go one of my
favorite things to do is to care for
patients with community health workers
so last year I was visiting a bee and
like musu a bee had had a chance to go
to school he was in Middle School in the
8th grade when his parents died he
became an orphan and had a dropout last
year we hired and trained a bee as a
community health worker and while he was
making door-to-door house calls he met
this young boy named Prince who mother
had had trouble breastfeeding him and by
the age of 6 months Prince have started
to waste away a
he had just been taught how to use this
color-coded measuring tape that wraps
around the upper arm of a child a
diagnosed malnutrition may be noticed
that Prince was in the red zone which
meant he had to be hospitalized so baby
took Prince and his mother to the river
got in a canoe and paddled for four
hours to get to the hospital later after
Prince was discharged a be taught Mom
how to feed baby a food supplement now a
few months ago baby took me to visit
Prince and he's a chubby little guy he's
meeting his milestones he's pull himself
up to a stand and even starting to say a
few words you know I'm so inspired by
these community health workers I I often
ask them why they do what they do and
when I asked a bee he said doc since I
dropped out of school this is the first
time I'm having a chance to hold a pen
to write my brain is getting fresh
stories of a B and musu have taught me
something fundamental about being human
our will to serve others can actually
help us transform our own conditions and
I was so moved by how powerful the will
to serve our neighbors can be a few
years ago when we faced a global
catastrophe in December 2013 something
happened in the rain forest across the
border from us in Guinea a toddler named
Emil fell sick with vomiting fever and
diarrhea he lived in an area where the
roads were sparse and there have been
massive shortages of health workers amel
died and a few weeks later his sister
died and few weeks later his mother died
and this disease would spread from one
community to another and it wasn't until
three months later that the world
recognized this as Ebola when every
minute counted we had already lost
months and by then the virus had spread
like wildfire all across West Africa and
eventually to other parts of the world
businesses shut down Airlines started
canceling routes at the height of the
crisis when we were told that 1.4
million people could be infected when we
were told that most of them would die
when we had nearly lost all hope
I remember standing with a group of
health workers in the rainforest where
an outbreak had just happened we were
helping train and equip them to put on
the masks the gloves and the gowns that
they needed to keep themselves safe from
the virus while they were serving their
patients I remember the fear in their
eyes and I remember staying up at night
terrified if I'd made the right call to
keep them in the field when Ebola
threatened to bring humanity to its
knees
Liberia's community health workers
didn't surrender to fear they did what
they had always done they answer the
call to serve their neighbors community
members across Liberia learnt the
symptoms of Ebola teamed up with nurses
and doctors to go door to door to find
the sick and get them into care they
tracked thousands of people who had been
exposed to the virus and helped break
the chain of transmission some 10,000
community health workers risk their own
lives to help hunt down this virus and
stop it in its tracks
today ebolas come under control in West
Africa and we've learned a few things
we've learned that blind spots in rural
healthcare can lead to hotspots of
disease and that places all of us at
greater risk
we've learned that the most efficient
emergency system is actually an everyday
system and that system has to reach all
communities including rural communities
like the meals most of all we've learned
from the courage of Liberia's community
health workers that we as people are not
defined by the conditions we face no
matter how hopeless they seem we're
defined by how we respond to them for
the past 15 years I've seen the power of
this idea to transform everyday citizens
into community health workers into
everyday heroes and I've seen it play
out everywhere from the forest
communities of West Africa to the rural
fishing villages of Alaska it's true
these key health workers aren't doing
neurosurgery but they're making it
possible to bring health care within
reach of everyone everywhere so now what
well we know that there are still
millions of people dying from
preventable causes in rural communities
around the world and we know that the
great majority of these deaths are
happening in these 75 blue shaded
countries what we also know is that if
we trained an army of community health
workers to learn even just 30
life-saving skills we could save the
lives of nearly 30 million people by
2030 30 services could save 30 million
lives by 2030 that's not just a
blueprint
we're proven this can be done in Liberia
the Liberian government is trading
thousands of workers like a bee and musu
after Ebola to bring health care to
every child and family in the country
and we've been honored to work with them
and are now teaming up with a number of
organizations that are working across
other countries to try to help them do
the same thing if we could help these
countries scale
we could save millions of lives and at
the same time we could create millions
of jobs we simply can't do that though
without technology people are worried
that technology is going to steal our
jobs but when it comes to community
health workers technology's actually
been vital for creating jobs without
technology without this smartphone
without this rapid test it would have
been impossible for us to be able to
employ a B and mu soo and I think it's
time for technology to help us train to
help us train people faster and better
than ever before as a doctor I use
technology to stay up to date and keep
certified I use smart phones I use apps
I use online courses but when a B wants
to learn he's got to jump back in that
canoe and get to the training center and
when moosa' shows up for training her
instructors are stuck using flip charts
and markers why shouldn't they have the
same access to learn as I do if we truly
want to meet health workers to master
those life-saving skills and even more
we've got to change this old school
model of Education and tech can truly be
a game-changer here I've been in awe of
the digital education revolution that
the likes of Khan Academy and EDX have
been leading and I've been thinking that
it's time it's time for a collision
between the digital education revolution
and the community health revolution and
so this brings me to my TED Prize wish I
wish I wish that you would help us
recruit the largest army of community
health workers the world has ever known
by creating the Community Health Academy
a global platform to Train Connect and
empower thank
[Music]
here's the idea so we'll create and
curate the best in digital education
resources we will bring those to
community health workers around the
world including a V and mu su so they'll
get video lessons on giving kids
vaccines and have online courses and
spotting the next outbreak so they're
not stuck using flip charts will help
these countries accredit these workers
so that they're not stuck remaining an
under-recognized undervalued group but
become a renowned empowered profession
just like nurses and doctors and will
create a network of companies and
entrepreneurs who've created innovations
that can save lives and help them
connect the workers like Musa so she can
help better serve her community and will
work tirelessly to persuade governments
to make community health workers a
cornerstone of their health care plans
we plan the tests and prototypes the
Academy in Liberia and a few other
partner countries and then we plan to
take a global including the rural North
America with the power of this platform
we believe countries can be more
persuaded that a healthcare revolution
really is possible my dream is that this
Academy will contribute to the training
of hundreds of thousands of community
members to help bring health care to
their neighbors the hundreds of millions
of them that live in the world's most
remote communities from the forest
communities of West Africa to the
fishing villages of rural Alaska from
the hilltops of Appalachia to the
mountains of Afghanistan and if this
vision is aligned with yours
head the community health Academy org
enjoying this revolution let us know if
you or your organization or someone you
know could help us as we try to build
this Academy over the next year now as I
look out into this room I realize that
our journeys are not self-made they're
shaped by others and there have been so
many here that have been part of this
cause we're so honored to be part of
this community and come
that's willing to take on a cause of
audacious of this one so I wanted to
offer as I end the reflection I think a
lot more about what my father taught me
these days I too have become a dad I
have two sons and my wife and I just
learned that she's pregnant with our
third child thank you
I was recently caring for a woman in
Liberia who like my wife was in her
third pregnancy but unlike my wife had
had no prenatal care with her first two
babies she lived in an isolated
community in the forest that had gone
for a hundred years without any health
care until til last year when a nurse
trained her neighbors to become
community health workers so here I was
seeing this patient who was in her
second trimester and I pulled out the
ultrasound to check on the baby and she
started telling us stories about her
first two kids and I had the ultrasound
probe on her belly and she just stopped
mid-sentence she turned to me and she
said doc what's that sound first time
she'd ever heard her baby's heartbeat
and her eyes lit up in the same way my
wife's eyes and my own eyes lit up when
we heard our baby's heartbeat for all of
human history illness has been universal
and access to care has not but as a wise
man once told me no condition is
permanent it's time it's time for us to
go as far as it takes that change this
condition together thank you
[Applause]
[Music]